I think it is self-evident that we live in a system where a significant proportion, perhaps most, of the total hours worked are useless and serve only as a pretext to justify the distribution of wealth from its true source. This is a theory privately held by many people which I meet, but which is shockingly absent from mainstream discourse. 

I am not just talking about the millions of 'administrators' on the payroll of the bloated public sector, whose role is to perpetuate 19th century bureaucracy and inject human error.

I am not just talking about hard-to-regulate parasitic industries, such as financial services or telemarketing, or the unprecedented expansion of sectors like corporate law, human resources, and public relations. 

I am mainly talking about the place where most people are employed; the wealth-creating private sector. Which has become inefficient due to the bloat of decades of unpunished rent-seeking, manifested as complex bureaucracy. Much of the complex bureaucracy in the private sector is corruption in disguise. 

The disguise is so effective because it can be easily countered with a question: "_why would private companies pay people to do nothing?_". It seems like a solid logic, any right- and left-wing ideologies both have this as a blind-spot. Hence, why I am drawing attention to it.

The first well known instance of this argument was published by David Graeber; [On the Phenomenon of Bullshit Jobs](https://strikemag.org/bullshit-jobs/) in STRIKE! Magazine in 2013. The most memorable claims being: 

> Huge swathes of people spend their days performing tasks they secretly believe do not really need to be performed.

> It’s as if someone were out there making up pointless jobs for the sake of keeping us all working.

> The moral and spiritual damage that comes from this situation is profound. It is a scar across our collective soul. Yet virtually no one talks about it.

> How can one even begin to speak of dignity in labour when one secretly feels one’s job should not exist?

It's time to talk about it.

## Why is fake work not discussed?

There is no incentive for anyone to shout loudly, _"I am pointless!"_.

### The masses are incentivized to deny it

Our identity is so tied to our profession, that bringing-into-question one's life's work is an existential threat to our ego and brings out an immune reaction in people.

Likewise, as we all quickly learn in the labour market, it is one's perceived utility and one's perceived prestige that dictates one's salary and authority. So, at the bottom of organizations, people only broadcast their utility. On LinkedIn, there is a constant chorus of singing one's own praise. There is no counterbalance to this. There is no organic generation of an evidence base to the contrary. 

> “It is difficult to get a man to understand something, when his salary depends on his not understanding it.”  
>
> ― Upton Sinclair, [I, Candidate for Governor, 1935](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/254630)


## Middle management are incentivized to deny it

Because value is so difficult to measure, lies make their way up the ranks of organizations. Information is filtered through the distortion field of the middle manager, who's worth is connected to the number of people he manages and the poorly calibrated incentives which he will reliably game. These organizations all suffer from the principal agent problem. 

In the "Principal-Agent Problem," there's a conflict of interest between a principal (like a government or corporate leader) who requires accurate information to make decisions, and agents (such as local officials or managers) who have incentives to misrepresent the truth to appear more successful or to avoid penalties. This misalignment of incentives can lead to significant inefficiencies and decision-making based on inaccurate data.

### The elite managerial class are incentivized to deny it

It is now widely acknowledged that we do live in a sort of globalized oligarchy. All sectors of the economy are dominated by a few large companies which desire, the cultural conversation is dominated by a few anointed institutions the political class is unified on. 

We have reached an equilibrium point, where they all agree on one thing: the continuation of existing revenue streams. The establishment is dependent on the continuation of the status quo. It is as simple as that.

I nonetheless believe the phenomenon of fake work dominating our lives to be the most import problem in the world. Because not only does it impoverish us, __it robs us from purpose__, and it allocates the riches to those who don't deserve it. 

## Why would private companies pay people to do nothing?

The economist published [On "bullshit jobs"](https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2013/08/21/on-bullshit-jobs) in 2013 in response to David Graeber's piece called "Bullshit Jobs", which I make downloadable here: [2013-economist-on-bullshit-jobs.md](assets/2013-economist-on-bullshit-jobs.md). 

The article simply gives an explanation for why many jobs _seem pointless_. I.e. the economy is very complex, and we can't always see the bigger picture. But as for argument that they are _not pointless_, the only argument is a single, a priori rhetorical question:  

> _"Why in the world would firms spend extraordinary amounts of money employing people to do worthless tasks (especially when they've shown themselves to be exceedingly good at not employing people to do worthless tasks)?"_ - [On "bullshit jobs" - R.A., Economist Free Exchange, 2013](https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2013/08/21/on-bullshit-jobs) 

But the author doesn't answer this rhetorical question; how do we know that they are not paying people to pretend? And it most certainly does not confront the hundreds of descriptive accounts of what people actually do in these jobs. There is no excuse for the depth of pointlessness that many millions of people are engaged in all across the world.

I can think of many reasons _why private companies pay people to do pointless work_. And I previously wrote about many of them in: [2022-11-11-bullshit-jobs](/_posts/2022-11-11-bullshit-jobs.md)

The simplest explanation in large organizations is that poor incentives, produce siloization and useless processes which eventually become dogma when they go unchecked too long.

Elon Musk candidly describes his experience of this effect even within SpaceX, which is staffed by some of the highest quality and self-motivated employees on the planet:

> "_Whatever departments you've got; that will be where your interfaces are right and then instead of like getting rid of something or uh questioning the constraints the one department will Design to the constraints of the other that the other department has given them without calling into question those constraints and saying those constraints are wrong, and you should actually take the approach that the the constraints that you're given are guaranteed to be some degree wrong._"[A conversation with Elon Musk about Starship - Everyday Astronaut - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cIQ36Kt7UVg?si=UNivUzJSNTT1Il-T&t=232)

Another reason is that

>“In the most dysfunctional organizations, signaling that work is being done becomes a better strategy for career advancement than actually doing work (if this describes your company, you should quit now).”  
>― Peter Thiel, [Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/25332940)


## Why do these inefficient companies survive?

But the solution to these problems is built into the market itself. If there is a better way of doing things, then why aren't the lumbering giants of industry replaced by new, more efficient organizations? I have only given the leading mechanism for inefficiency in organizations. Everyone knows those. If things are really so bad, why do those organizations still exist?

There are plenty of reasons; 

- [Managerial capitalism](/_posts/2022-11-13-managerial-capitalism.md) Large companies are run by hired stewards, not owners and are incentivized to keep their salary by 'managing' and enforcing status quo through political means, rather than technically improving anything. There are a number of components which help to maintain this:
	- The stakeholders of companies hold with the expectation of quarterly profits. They have no desire for short term sacrifice for long term gain, by which time their money will have moved elsewhere. They milk the company dry. See Boeing's. 
	- Governments desire for market stability. The number of 'skilled jobs' a company provides is seen a good in itself, regardless of what they are actually doing. The government will support the company, rather than let it fail, and the competition fill the void more efficiently, as it is supposed.
	- Large corporations prevent competition by lobbying for regulation which imposes a barrier to entry against new participants.
- [Professional standards organizations](/_posts/2023-11-27-professional-standards.md) often resist, or attempt to slow any change in entry requirements, qualification, standard procedure, or technological improvement in order to protect relevance and revenue stream.
- Business processes are inherited and supplemented, they are never replaced or rationalized, and they become dogma.
- Rent seeking is incentivized in all areas. Once you find yourself as a middle-man or a bureaucratic lynch-pin, you never give up the privilege 
- The economy has become so horizontally fragmented, that there are too many degrees of abstraction from the source of production for each actor to navigate intelligently. Everything possible is contracted-out. Consultants exist for everything. At a certain point, we hit a critical mass where most of the population are engaged in the derivative, abstract tasks; unmeasurable and therefore unaccountable and paid all the same in the confused information space, that there is a confluence of interest to keep the situation as is. Everyone understands the game, we all play it, and we all loose. It is a tragedy of the commons.
- Modern work involves a total reliance on ever-growing process and litigation. Breakdown of real personal relationships due to corporate mobility, burgeoning organizations, made up of strangers with only process and impersonal interactions to bind them together. People never work where they grow up, and move jobs every few years.
- Paying for someone's time rather than for the completion of a tasks or delivery of value. This is a perverse incentive. Too often, employees function as serfs, being paid to appear busy to their colleges and managers. Managers are often content to incubate their egos through the illusion their underlings are working, even if they are not doing anything useful.


## What to do about it? 

First; acknowledge that exists!

We desperately need to identify and acknowledge the existence of fake work as a problem. In doing so, we should be clear that this observation is not necessarily a complaint against capitalism or socialism. This observation is simply an observation about the state of the world.

My view, is that capitalism is clearly the best way to deliver human flourishing known to man. It is clear that the creation of such a tragedy of inefficiency is really a failure of competition to be allowed to deliver alternatives. We have no "exit" from the oligarchy. No alternative.

For too long, we have listened to the Luddites and saboteurs who have unwittingly conspired with the oligopolies in all existing industries to regulate away market competition and increase the barrier to entry. We all know that the biggest barrier to starting a new business is actually the mountain of compliance bureaucracy acting like a sword of Damocles over the necks of the fledging new company. Loosing sleep over what petty standards he may have infringed. Not because he wants to cut standards to maximize his margins, but because there are so many conflicting rules, from different sources, and they are conveyed in such a deliberately obfuscating way, that it is functionally impossible for the founder to know how to navigate the compliance space.

Since the 1970s, innovation has only occurred in a fundamentally new industry; communications technology (I have also heard genomics).  But we are now at an inflection point where regulation will cement the monopolies in that sector too.

Clearly we need regulation. But, we need to simplify and better communicate the requirements.

We need to acknowledge as a society that:

> _"All orgs get to the point where their internal processes and systems are decaying faster than any sort of intervention can save them. Like leprosy or necrotizing fasciitis, the patient still lives but their days are numbered."_ [SLS: Is cancellation too good? – Casey Handmer's blog (wordpress.com)](https://caseyhandmer.wordpress.com/2021/02/24/sls-is-cancellation-too-good/)

And: 

>  _"The only way, that there’s any chance of long term changes; is that you have to build into the system institutions and public acceptance and elite acceptance of a kind of constant reinvention and rejuvenation and closing and refounding of things. It’s the only conceivable way that over a time period like 100 years."_ [Dominic Cummings - COVID, Brexit, & Fixing Western Governance - Dwarkesh Patel podcast, November 15th 2023](https://www.dwarkeshpatel.com/p/dominic-cummings#details)

We need to liberate people from the crushing depression of are wasting their lives doing functionally useless actions, when they know full well that they should be caring for their loved ones. Their relationships with parents and their own children are sacrificed on the altar of the status quo. 

We are desperately lacking in care roles; teachers, nurses, doctors and we are seriously overstaffed in administration.