
### Professional Standards Organisations have become Cartels of Certification which harm innovation

The immune response of the establishment oligopoly to innovation is always 'safety and quality standards'. This marketing strategy of embedding a universally agreeable or seemingly undeniable claim into the brand name is very effective at winning over the dumb majority[(referred to as declarative marketing by Eric Weinstein in a debate)](https://youtu.be/Xkg3C8JDi_0?si=moy4jJ9ZFIS_AQEn&t=2013).

But why doesn't challenge come from the bottom more often? Because of the convergent interests of professional standards organisations to maintain the status quo and safeguard the overwhelming proportion of their revenue stream, which is in 'compliance'. Professional standards are also the birthplace of regulation.

Professional standards exclude all non-elites from having any opinion, unless they have devoted a lifetime to perpetuating the dry anti-innovation mantra of their guild and thus become a certified expert.

#### My personal experience of Professional Standards in structural engineering

I started on the path of structural engineering after I completed a 4-year Master’s Degree, but very quickly became disillusioned when I realised that the work, is largely underpaid bureaucracy. What problem solving is left is largely navigating deliberately obfuscating compliance. 

The ostensible role of a structural engineer is to specify the thicknesses of beams and connection with an appropriate balance between cost and appropriate margins for safety. They mainly work as consultants, their value being in the form of reports containing expert advice. Construction firms generally know how to build things which don't fall over, but any new construction project must comply with the 'building controls' of the local authority, who may inspect the property; people need assurance and in case there is a structural issue. A property is thus uninsurable without a structural engineer's report. 

But, in reality, half the time, the builder has already installed the beam, or built the wall and the engineer charges $1000 to provide an excessively complicated report, containing essentially one equation, calculating the bending moment in the beam, and comparing that to the manufacturer's guidelines. There is no skill involved in this. This is a compliance role that could be conducted by anyone who can use a calculator and multiply 3 numbers together.

But to maintain the stability of the industry, elaborate legal mechanisms are in place to preclude the injection of any efficiency into the system. Clearly, we need some assurance that builders are contracting safely and responsibly. But the methodology is so clearly flawed. If the intent is to provide assurance, then take a full 3D lidar drone scan of the building, along with a comprehensive bank of 40 MP photos from throughout the construction process. The data can be reviewed by a devoted 3rd party red-team who, check the bending moments on the beams all the same, but are also trained to look for a wider array problems using technology.

Such a system would likely be cheaper than sending a generalist structural engineer in every circumstance, who often will drive for 3 hours or more to get to site (due to low availability of this profession) and take a few measurements with his tape measure.

Most importantly, no structural engineer can sign anything and no assurance will be insurable without "Chartership", an accreditation awarded by the [IStructE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institution_of_Structural_Engineers).  A process that takes at least 9 years to obtain (4 years of education and 5 years of professional training). But this is true for a project of any size. So the problem continues. 

It is the fault of professional standards that a maths problem soluble by a 12-year-old, needs to be carried about by an engineer with a minimum of 4 years tertiary education and 5 years professional training. And it is a great tragedy that so much engineering talent is wasted in trying to find ways to impose more and more compliance on the industry, nominally for safety and quality, most really, in order to survive, when they are no longer needed in a rational market.

My argument is that assurance and quality control is extremely important, but, despite their appeals to authority; professional standards organisations are now incentivised to worsen the effectiveness of the quality control by ensuring that only arbitrarily over-qualified people are allowed to perform the inspection. And those qualified engineers finding themselves on a bureaucratic lynchpin, are incentivized to rent-seek, thus making their own personhood and their physical presence central to the whole assurance operation. 

Specifically, the centrality of the role of a structural engineer means they have an incentive to resist any automation to the process, an incentive to complicate the process as much as possible to maintain the perceived legitimacy and workload and most importantly the incentive to strongly resist any possibility of competition from non-chartered engineers being allowed to perform the same role without jumping through the same hoops as they did. But there is frankly legitimate no argument that 9 years of mathematical education is required as a baseline for the vast majority of structural reports. The chartership organization therefore operates as a cartel in bureaucracy.

The secondary and potentially worse consequence of this is the opportunity cost of highly trained and capable engineers themselves, wasting their potential on perpetuating a system of paper-trading which is profitable but mostly valueless and demotes and dilutes any technical contribution the structural engineer is able to make within their lifetime of labour.  This unseen effect is a true tragedy.

In summary, these standards school people to think inside the box. There's an alignment of interests between regulators, politicians, and large companies. Employees who've spent years acquiring professional certification are incentivized to defend the industry that hinders innovation. The industry's incentives are to maintain the status quo to protect their revenue from disruption. They pretend to change while stifling any real innovation. They use arguments of quality and safety to squash improvement in physical technology.
